all the stars we see including our sun
are in a balance of powers
stars are very heavy objects so they
have strong gravity
which presses them from the outside and
makes them shrink
but inside a star while it burns fuel
there are nuclear reactions that produce
incredible amounts of energy this energy
is the light and heat that we feel
during the day
but most importantly these reactions
increase
the pressure inside the star and create
a force
that is fighting with gravity
so as long as the star has a full tank
it's safe
but then the fuel runs out the pressure
inside the star falls
and the gravity wins
a star the size of our sun can shine for
about 10 billion years
specifically our lovely sun is about 4.5
billion years old
and has already burned half its fuel
the next stage in a star's life comes
when it runs out of juice
internal pressure drops but gravity
continues to press
at some point a star simply collapses
under its own weight and shrinks to the
size of its core
at the speed of almost a quarter of the
speed of light
in less than half a second a huge star
turns into a small and dense object
this rapid collapse creates incredible
shock waves
that cause the upper layers of the star
to explode
now an incredible amount of energy and
matter
is thrown into outer space at this
moment
luminosity of the star increases
millions
or even billions of times this is the
flash that our scientists can see
with super powerful telescopes but the
light from this explosion
doesn't reach our planet until many
years later
so in fact this star has long since
faded
there are several options at this point
it all depends
on the size of the star if its mass is
small
about the mass of our sun then for
several months
this flash will become brighter and
brighter until it reaches its peak
then the energy of the explosion will
begin to dissipate
gradually fading and cooling down a few
years will pass
and the temperature of the former star
will match that of space
and it will simply cease to exist
but the heavier the star the more
interesting the events will be
heavy stars burn their fuel too quickly
and have a much shorter life span
stars weighing about eight masses of the
sun can
collapse into a rather unusual object
which is rarely found in the universe a
neutron star
this dull ball is only six to twelve
miles wide
and covered with a hard metal crust
about half a mile
thick neutron stars can weigh about
two suns and have a strong gravity force
if you feel comfortable and in good
shape on earth
you wouldn't even be able to lift a
needle or a match here
what's more you would be pressed to the
surface
like a pancake and just unable to move
but there are stars dozens of times
heavier than the sun
an explosion of such a supernova which
weighs at least
40 times more than the sun gives birth
to the most inexplicable and mysterious
object in the universe
a black hole at first an incredibly
bright explosion occurs
a shock wave spreads carrying dust and
matter of the former star around like a
fog
and at the place of the explosion only a
small black
disk is left this black abyss is the
heaviest
object in the universe it's so heavy
that its gravity curves space time
around it
yes the closer you are to a black hole
the slower
time will go for you if you could get
close enough to one of them
spend a couple of minutes in its orbit
and return to earth
you would simply not recognize your home
one minute near a black hole
can be a month a year or a decade on
earth
this depends on how heavy the black hole
is
but don't get too close the force of its
gravity
is so strong that even light can't
escape from it
humanity also knows about the existence
of super
massive black holes they gradually build
up their mass
feeding on different cosmic objects just
like a predator
usually such supermassive black holes
lie in the centers of galaxies and their
gravity is so strong
they can hold countless stars near them
for example
this is the only photo of a black hole
which is located in the center
of the messier 87 galaxy the orange glow
around it
is its event horizon that's the remains
of the light
from the objects this black hole has
swallowed
you're quite safe though the closest
black hole
is 1120 light years away
but supernovae can explode not only when
gravity wins the fight with the star's
internal forces
sometimes the opposite happens the
nuclear fusion
inside the star begins to affect much
more matter than normal
the pressure inside a star increases and
it defeats the force of gravity
that exerts pressure on the star from
outside at this point
there's a boom
this never happens by itself and this
type of supernova
is only possible in binary star systems
two stars are spinning around each other
one star begins to swallow the substance
from the other
then the nuclear reactions inside it are
no longer in balance
and a supernova explodes
[Music]
for some time scientists believed that
such an explosion could occur
in 2022. there's such a binary system
in the swan constellation at a distance
of 1800 light years from the sun
the luminous red nova should have
occurred here
such a red flash would have been visible
to the naked eye
for months and after the explosion
itself
and the merger of two stars a new hotter
and heavier star
was to appear in their place
but a new analysis of the data revealed
a calculation error and this event will
not happen
soon after all so now we see that a
supernova explosion
is a very dangerous event and it can
cause
great harm to our planet if it happens
close enough
the main danger is gamma rays
this is the radiation that comes from
the explosion
when these rays reach the earth they
affect our space shield
the atmosphere they reduce the ozone
layer
and make us vulnerable to solar
radiation and cosmic rays
in this case all life on the planet is
an incredible danger
and the bad news is that such an
explosion could happen
quite soon beetlejuice
the brightest star in the night sky
about 17 times
larger than the sun and 8.5 billion
years old
it's begun to exhaust its fuel reserves
scientists predict that this giant will
explode like a supernova
at any moment within the next ten
thousand years
so it may happen in a few centuries or
even tomorrow
everything will happen as follows
beetlejuice will collapse in a fraction
of a second
and then it will explode so brightly
that it will look like a second moon
in the night sky we will observe a new
bright spot in the sky
for weeks or even months but then
it will begin to fade until it
completely disappears
not without a trace though in its place
there will be
a neutron star weighing 1.5 times the
sun
[Music]
it will be one of the biggest events
that humanity has
ever seen still we have nothing to be
afraid of
beetlejuice is about 550 light years
away from us
so its x-rays and ultraviolet light will
not affect us
a much greater danger is posed by the
release of material
that occurs in a supernova explosion
but this shouldn't make you worried
either the shock wave won't reach the
earth
until 6 million years later and it will
be suppressed by the oncoming solar wind
so if we see beetlejuice explode today
it will be an epic sight but in fact
the star will not exist at the time
because it will mean
the event itself happened almost six
centuries ago
it's just that now the light from it has
reached us
some scientists believe that the
ordovician silurian extinction events
which occurred almost half a billion
years ago
happened exactly because of a star
explosion
then almost 60 percent of marine
vertebrates
went extinct yet it was not a supernova
but a hypernova that is what scientists
call
explosions of stars 100 to 150 times
larger than the sun in addition to the
abnormal weight
the star must rotate very quickly such
objects are very rare in our galaxy
there are a few of them and scientists
believe that hypernovae
occur about once in 200 million years